now that we've written our first program
we can reflect a little bit on what we
learned about the Java language so first
Java is an object-oriented language that
has very strict requirements about how
you write programs so first off any dot
Java file has to contain a class
declaration okay
well we'll see later that there are also
things like interfaces where that's not
a hundred percent true but it's mostly
true to say that every Java file has to
have a class declaration likewise any
piece of code you write say the larger
method we wrote has to be part of a
class the square root function in Java
it's part of a class called math and
we'll see later than things like global
constants those two are part of the
class the other thing we saw is that
when you want to run a Java program we
have to give a main method this is all
the code that's gonna run when we
actually execute the program and we
declare it using public static void main
string brackets args and we'll take
apart a little bit in the next lecture
and in lab 1 what all this means but for
now we're just treating it as a big old
blob of mystery syntax now the other
thing we observed is that Java is a
statically typed language so what that
means is that when you declare a
variable or a parameter for a function
or even the return type for a method you
have to say what type it is likewise
expressions have a type so if I say
string X equals 5 plus 10 that 5 plus 10
has type integer and therefore it can't
the result cannot be put in string tanks
ok and those types are permanent now the
most important thing about the static
typing system is that whenever you try
and run or when you try to compile your
programs the compiler checks and make
sure that all the types are in agreement
and that ensures that you avoid certain
types of errors like well if you avoid
specifically type errors so that's
unlike a language like Python where the
type checks are performed during
execution okay so let's reflect a little
bit on static typing what we might like
about it and what we might not and so
ordinarily what I would do if we lived
in an ideal universe you know I'd ask
you questions but since you're not in my
house I can't do that or at least I
assume you're not in my house
I guess we can check but pretty weird if
I drag you out here your own self still
kind of moving in I see this here travel
fox poster I got this many years ago
it's signed I really know these guys are
exactly but yeah yeah anyway where are
we
I asked that tight so the good parts of
static typing well one thing that's good
about it is it catches certain types of
errors making it easier on the
programmer to debug their code another
good thing is type errors and never
occur well I'll say almost cuz time can
we'll see you later why but type errors
can almost never occur on the user's
computer end users computer so for
example if you're writing an Android app
really there should be no danger of a
type error reaching their phone because
ideally you're not doing anything that's
gonna cause type errors okay
another good thing makes it easier to
read and reason about code so if I'm
looking at code someone else's written
everything's got a type it makes it
easier to understand what's going on
especially when I get to bigger programs
and then finally the code can run more
efficiently so for example no need to do
expensive run time type checks there's
other reasons when we talk then though
this isn't a machine structures course
we're not gonna talk about memory
allocation and any great detail but if
you go on to such courses you'll learn
about why arrays that have stem
statically typed languages can be more
efficient but a little beyond the scope
of our course now the bad side of static
types will code is have to
that's explicitly I'm sorry oh just say
code is more verbose right I have to
actually write out int and string and
whatever else everywhere and the code is
lesson general so if we look at the
larger method this is a larger method
that only works for integers if I wanted
to compare strings or even
floating-point numbers like I have here
5.5 I try running this code it yells at
me and it says cannot do this conversion
I can't take a floating-point or a
so-called double and turn it into an
integer that's not allowed or is in
Python that would be no problem okay
there is a way around this in Java
called generics and there are a fairly
decent solution they're not as good as
the equivalent generics and other
languages but we'll see that there is a
way out that makes things not totally
hopeless okay so that's just a
high-level summary of some things we've
learned about the Java language so I'll
just say what's next so there's a
homework zero that you can immediately
start working on so this will give you a
chance if you've never written Java
before a chance to explore the basics on
your own now this is not a Java class so
we're not gonna sit down and carefully
go through each piece of syntax we're
going to expect you to go look at
reference materials to look at example
code out there and use your prior
background knowledge to get up to speed
on the basics of Java just once you
learn in a one language we expect you to
start being able to learn other
languages very quickly next up there is
also a lab now if you're someone
actually at Berkeley taking the
residential version of the course or
like the you know the real-life version
you can use the lab machines but most
people just run the code on their own
computers so lab 1b explains how to
compile and run code on your own machine
but but once you are all set up either
using the lab machines or abled or set
up to run code on your own machine what
lab one does is it tells you how to use
our system that lets you download the
starter files how to it'll give you some
exercises to do and then finally to
submit them if you're someone with no
prior Java experience it would be a
really good idea to do homework zero
before the lab just so that you have
some sense so
what writing Java programs is all about
and then finally in the next lecture
we'll talk a little bit about what
public static yada-yada
actually means and go a little deeper
into some of the object-oriented
features for Java and that'll be
basically it for the core of the java
language and then from there we'll start
getting into some data structures and
learning java in the context of
something that's important to us in the
course
see you next